Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm here with a return guest, Doctor Daniel
Conroy Beam is associate professor of psychology in the
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences at the University
of California. Santa Barbara. And today, we're going to
talk about the manosphere and how people they misuse
research in evolutionary psychology. And by the way, I'm
also leaving a link in the description to my
first interview with Doctor Conroybin. So, Doctor Conroybin, welcome
back to the show. It's always a pleasure to
have you on.
All right, thank you so much for having me
back. I'm excited to talk.
So, first of all, uh, and I mean, as
a way of introducing the topic for people who
might not be familiar with it, uh, even though
I think that at least people who spend some
time on the internet and social media should at
least come across the word manosphere, at least that,
but what is the manosphere exactly?
Yeah, good, good question, and it's a hard question.
I, I, I've been thinking about how to answer
this. Uh, I'm not sure there is a good
short answer. Uh, I mean, the best I could
say it's a nebulous, uh, loose collection of different
online communities, as well as the influencers and media
that cater to them. Uh, MAYBE. There probably is
no like one single uniting thing, but the the
closest you can get to uniting thing is uh
sort of concern with men's issues uh in society
at large today. Uh, THERE'S a heavy influence in
a lot of corners in the manosphere, heavy focus
on issues of like dating and relationships, that's probably
uh the biggest uh concern that unites a lot
of manosphere communities and manosphere influencers. But also concerns
about sort of like social justice, but uh with
uh inequalities towards men. Uh, SO this includes things
like, you know, men's rights advocates who are concerned
about like sort of legal and social perceived legal
and social inequalities that men experience in in modern
society. ALL the way to like, you know, pick
up artists who are mainly concerned with, like, just,
you know, dating advice, how to, like, hack uh
psychology to have more success in dating and relationships,
maybe not even relationships, maybe just dating. And then
of course like the extreme end on the other
side are our incels who are like primarily concerned
with uh, you know, their own personal lack of
success in the dating realm, and so. And you
know, as well as all the influencers that can
catered these people, so like the big names are,
you know, probably people you've heard of, you're like
Andrew Tate's, you're fresh and fits, you know, maybe
as far as like your Jordan Peterson's, maybe even.
Uh, TOUCHING, bordering upon your like Joe Rogan's even,
you know.
So it's basically a large collection of people that
includes, I mean, pickup artists, the red pill community,
the black pill community, uh some of the insult
community, and I mean, basically people like that,
right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, those I, I would characterize
as being, yeah, all big parts of the the
manosphere community. Mhm.
So, I mean, uh, the main reason why I
invited you on the show to talk about the
manosphere, because, I mean, I could have invited other
people to talk about the same topic, is because
at a certain point, and you're going to tell
us about that, you found About that your own
research was being misused by people from the manosphere.
So tell us about that. How did you learn
about it and what kinds of, what, or what
parts of your research were, were being misused by
them? I mean, tell us all about it.
Yeah, no, I mean, I, so I want to
be clear, and it's, you know, I appreciate, yeah,
there are other people you could. So I want
to be clear, like, I'm not an expert on
the manosphere, right? I'm not a sociologist, I'm not
a historian, right? I don't want to claim that
I have like special insight into like the workings
or the history of the manosphere or these kinds
of like social communities. You know, when I am,
I'm an expert in human mating, right, the psychology
of human mating. That's where my work is, that's
what I focus on, that's what I, you know,
think about day to day, uh, you know, the
manosphere, you know, being in this sphere, of course,
in the mating sphere, right? Like, of course, I
was vaguely aware of the manosphere for a long
time. It's, you know, these things come up, right?
Uh, SO I, I sort of like knew it
was out there, um. You know, students would talk
to you, they discover like, oh, you study human
mating, like, what do you think about this like
pickup artist YouTube, YouTuber that I watch or something
like that, they would like ask you your opinions
on these things or, you know, Jeffrey Miller. You
know, he wrote that book, was it called Date,
I think, um, which was supposed to be like
a sort of more scientifically informed pickup artistry book.
I think that came out when I was in
grad school, you know, I'm a fan of like
a YouTube video essay too. I'll often throw something
up when I'm working, you know, I'm a big
fan of like FT S signifier, who talks about
a lot of these things, you know, I've seen
some of like your interviews on these things. So
it was like I was like aware of it,
but I always sort of kept it at an
arm's length because I was just like this is
just a unserious, uninteresting, kind of gross question, if
I'm being honest, uh of online communities, and, you
know, I'm interested in the science, so I just
sort of ignored it. Um, I, I wasn't like
really forced to like confront it and yeah, see,
see my connection to it, uh, until it was
actually one of your prior guests, so, uh, Louis
Louis Baho, we've had on the podcast before, so
this was maybe. Two years ago now or something
like that, uh, Louis actually came out to Santa
Barbara to visit. So Louis, uh, Louis is like
a sociologist by trading, um, uh, and, um, he
was doing his PhD on connections between evolutionary psychology
and the manosphere. Uh, SO he came out to
Santa Barbara, he spent like, I think like a
month with us, you know, hanging around my lab
meeting, hanging around the, the Center for Evolutionary Psychology,
and he gave us a talk on his work
on, you know, ways in which evolutionary psychology gets
used in the manosphere. Um, AND I, I just,
I remember like sitting in the Center for Evolutionary
Psychology lab space, like listening to Louis talk, and
he's like, yeah, you know, um, the intel community,
they maintain this Wikipedia page, you know, called the
scientific Black Pill, that's just a giant, you know,
basically annotated bibliography of, you know, peer reviewed research
papers that they claim support their worldview and like
a lot of your guys' work is in here.
Uh, AND he, you know, we just like pulled
it up, uh, and we're just like searching for,
you know, our names and people's names that we
knew. And yeah, I just, I remember the like
feeling of like vertigo, like seeing, you know, my
papers and my friends' papers being cited in this
like, you know, annotated bibliography of like misogyny as
like, uh, you know, supporting these these ideologies that
I didn't think my work supported. I still don't
think my work supported. Uh, SO that was really
my, my like inroad into this. I like I
owe a debt to Louis, uh, to opening my
eyes to this, and, you know, I just been
sort of grappling since then with like, yeah, how
do I, how do you move forward, right? How
do you make sense of like, You know, why
is our work getting used in this way and,
and what does that mean like for us as
scientists?
OK, but when it comes to your own research,
what kinds of claims were people from the Venosphere
making based on it? And, and I mean, in,
in what ways were those claims misrepresenting your
research? Yeah, so I mean, like to give a
specific example, uh, so, you know, I wrote this,
this, this op ed about this, uh, which is
also part of how I've gotten uh roped into
this, this, uh, conversation. Um, uh, OR this, you
know, this whole broader conversation, um, but, you know,
one specific example. Um, WAS, uh, it was a
paper of mine that was cited in this scientific
black pill is like Wikipedia page of, uh, of,
of, of peer reviewed articles that support sort of
like Incel worldviews. Um, I, I, I'm forgetting a
little bit the details of how it was cited.
I mean, it was a paper on sex differences
and mate preferences that I had published. Um, uh,
AND they, they cited it as evidence that like
women prefer dominant partners, uh, women who prefer dominant
men as partners. Um, uh, AND it was interesting
because they had quoted, uh, like a colleague of
mine, uh, who was a co-author on that paper,
as I recall, as describing the paper as having
found that, having found that women prefer dominant men
as partners. Um, AND this was supposed to, you
know, support the idea that like, you know, women
are always looking to trade up from, you know,
the low status loser to some like high status
losers. You can't trust women to be faithful to
you long term because they're always gonna dump you
for some higher status dominant alpha. Right, this is
the, the interpretation that they drew out of my
paper. But I mean, the, the crazy thing was,
you know, I like, I looked at that and
I was like, I don't remember us having a
measure of preference for dominance in that paper, right?
Like, I'm pretty sure I don't generally ask that.
You know, it was an older paper for me
at that time, so maybe I just forgot what
measures we had in that paper, but yeah, I
went back to the paper. We did not ask
about preferences for dominance in that paper, right? That
paper had no evidence of uh any sex difference
in preference for dominance. I mean, I, I'm, I
believe such a preference, such a difference has been
found before, but that was not in our paper,
um, and even, you know, people have like Uh,
defended that quote that that citation because it was,
it's actually a colleague who quoted the paper saying
that and the the Intel wiki was just uh
the scientific black but was just quoting the colleague.
But even if you go to the colleague's quotation,
right, if you go to the paper that they're
quoting from, um, you know, my colleague is saying
They aren't saying that this paper, they aren't saying
that women have a preference for, right? Like, uh,
the section that they quoted was from the discussion
section of that paper, uh, where they were considering
alternative explanations to what they were actually talking about
in that paper. So they were saying, you know,
you might argue, for example, that women have a
preference for dominance, but the very next sentence was
them arguing against that idea, right? So even, even
the quotation that they chose, like, That quote was
referring to evidence that didn't exist, uh, but even
like even that quote, like, the researchers were not
arguing for what they cherry picked out of that
sentence, they were actually arguing the opposite, and that
was just like a sort of devil's advocate kind
of like, even if you thought this were true,
here's some alternative evidence. Uh, SO it's just like
a, it was a a crazy, uh, like, uh
just uh uh. Weird like game of telephone where
like my paper morphed into like this claim that
was never found in the paper like that morphed
into this like counterpoint that was like cherry picked
selectively out of the discussion section. Uh, SO, you
know, if you didn't know these things, if you
didn't know the literature, if you're just like a
curious frustrated young guy. This is gonna look to
you like, oh, this is a like a great
resource. Here's all of these like scientific papers with
direct quotations that like back up this worldview that
seems really coherent and really interesting, but you just
like scratch the surface a little bit and you
see like, at least in my case, right, like
this is, there's no connection between what the black
bill said about the work and what the work
was actually saying.
Yeah, by the way, what was the paper about
exactly?
The original paper?
Yes,
um, I don't even recall which one was it,
um. I think this was a paper on uh
using like multivariate approaches to look at sex differences
and make preferences. So, you know. There was um
some argument. Essentially, you know, sex differences and mate
preferences have been of interest for a long time
because there are, you know, relevant theoretical questions there.
Um, AND most people, when they look at mate
preferences, people have a lot of preferences. This is
something that I think the intels also overlook, right?
If you ask people what they're looking for in
a partner. They say a lot of things, right?
They say they want somebody who's kind and intelligent
and attractive and, you know, funny, and, you know,
shares my, you know, religious worldview and etc. ETC.
They, they generally won't stop talking until you stop
them from talking. Um, BUT when we consider, you
know, sex differences and make preferences, we often just
pick one of those at a time, look at
the difference on that dimension, write it down, move
on to the next one, move on to the
next one. THIS was like sort of the start
of what became like a cornerstone of my research
area, which is like Make choices highly multivariate, right?
Like we're looking for lots of things, uh, we're
trying to satisfy lots of preferences at the same
time, uh, and so we shouldn't look at life
one dimension at a time, we should consider all
of these things collectively and, you know, how big
are the differences across all of these dimensions. So
that was part of why it was like, Again,
so jarring to see them sort of like laser
focus on my paper, you know, laser focus on
like sex differences and dominance, because very few of
my papers are ever about like we should emphasize
this one difference a lot, right? Most of my
papers are like, you know, what is the bigger
picture, right? How do we not lose the forest
for the trees? Uh, SO, uh, yeah, I did
not remember emphasizing a sex difference and dominance per
se, uh, and it's cause I didn't. Mhm.
And do you know if uh this kind of
phenomenon of people in the menosphere misusing, uh, research
in evolutionary psychology is a more generalized thing? I
mean, is that something that they do frequently or
not? Yeah, yeah, I mean, I, I think, you
know, uh, I would encourage all of my colleagues,
all of my colleagues in evolutionary psychology to like
peruse the scientific black pill. It's uh uncomfortable, but
eye opening experience to see, you know, how our
work gets interpreted sort of one step out. I
think there's a lot of ideas that start in
evolutionary psychology and make it into these manosphere circles,
but they They just something's getting lost in translation,
right? They're getting distorted uh in ways that, you
know, in some cases some people might agree with,
I don't know. But I think in many cases,
probably not. Um, YOU know, I know, uh, uh,
I'm a little hazy on the details now, but
I remember uh there was another like in that
that same talk where Louis was like showing this
to us, uh, he had a specific example of
uh my colleague Patrick Durkey. They had cited some
work of of Patrick's as making some claim about
like, Dating and and mating advice or something like
that. But the crazy thing is Patrick doesn't study
mating, right? Patrick studies status and personality, right? It
was again like the claim that they were making
on Patrick's work, I know, is not something that
Patrick studies, is not something that Patrick is interested
in. It was just like. They do this kind
of like really superficial sort of like keyword search
and like any sort of like word that you
can interpret as being connected to what the argument
they want to make, uh, like they just grab
that, they cherry pick the the citation, they cherry
pick, you know, the quotation if it's useful, uh,
and it, you know, it ends up looking like.
This exhaustive, uh, uh, you know, resource base, um,
but it's, it's all pretty selective, it's all pretty,
uh, embellished, you know, it doesn't. Doesn't, you know,
connect with the real back and forth that's happening
in these actual literatures. Uh, IT'S, you know, I,
I think like incels, you know, uh, Louis, you
know, had, uh, I was actually just reading his
dissertation recently and he had uh he had this
like meme, this is like manosphere meme. Uh, THAT
he quoted in it, it was like, you know,
on the one hand, scientists are like, you know,
here's the evidence, what conclusions can we draw from
this? And on the other hand, it was like
feminists and what feminists do you like, here's the
conclusion, what facts can we find to support it,
and it's ironic cause like that's exactly what they're
doing, right? Like, they have a worldview that they
that they believe in and they want to support,
and they're just, you know, trolling through the literature
to find anything that could be loosely interpreted as
supporting that worldview and ignoring everything else and just
like extracting. Uh, A long list of things that
they could use as like easy talking points to
like Gish gallop, uh, people in debates over their
worldview. um. You know, to give another like concrete
example, uh, you know, one idea, one scientific idea
that looms really large in manosphere circles, uh, is
the dual mating strategy hypothesis, right? So this is,
this is a hypothesis that genuinely was very popular
in evolutionary psychology, genuinely was like the scientific state
of the art in like 2010, right? Like, uh,
and this is, you know, the idea that Uh,
you know, there are shifts in women's mating psychology
over the course of the menstrual cycle, you know,
specifically, you know, around ovulation near the fertile window,
but the exact details of this have changed over
time as the science has progressed, but, you know,
at least part of the original idea was like
there's this increased interest in, you know, short term
mating, especially with like attractive, dominant men, uh, as
a means of pursuing this dual mating strategy where
you get sort of like, uh uh you sort
of Conceive offspring with partners who have, you know,
good genes or indicators of good genes, uh, but
then you potentially pursue investment for those offspring, uh,
for men who don't necessarily have those markers for
men who are, you know, better long term partners,
uh, more cooperative, you know, good provider kind of
partners, um. This was a really popular idea in
2010, um, and it's still, you know, has its
supporters, although the idea has like progressed and matured
a lot over that time, right? The, the versions
of the dual mating strategy hypothesis that exist in
the scientific literature today do not look very much
like the versions that get discussed in the manosphere
today, right? So the manosphere has taken this as
like, you know, women are sort of like untrustworthy.
Uh, LIKE, you know, uh, all they wanna do
is just like, Have sex with chads, uh, and
then, you know, dupe losers into supporting the children
that they produce with these like genetically superior alpha
males, right? Uh AND science supports that, uh, but
like, you know, the versions of the dual mating
strategy hypothesis that exists today are much more subtle,
much more sophisticated, you know, uh, have much more
like, you know, conditional, uh, caveats and, uh, even
Like within the field too, like, I think the
popularity of the dual mating strategy hypothesis has waned
a lot, right? There are prominent competitors, prominent alternative
explanations that now I would say on average are
more popular, right? So my colleague Jim Roy has
been arguing from day one, the dual mating strategy
hypothesis is wrong, uh, that women don't have this
dual mating strategy, uh, that what, what shifts we
do see across the menstrual cycle are mostly byproducts
of adaptations that are designed to calibrate. Behavior across
different menstrual cycles. It's like there's really, really prominent
disagreement about this hypothesis within the scientific literature that
is absent from manosphere discussions of the science, right?
They do not know. I mean, good for my
colleague Jim, they don't know who he is. They
don't know his ideas. He lives a happier life
than I do. Uh, BUT like they're not discussing,
you know, the scientific debate that's emerging because they
don't care about the debate, they don't care about
the evidence, they just want to cherry pick the
stuff that supports their worldview. And they're also not
discussing. You know, the advances, even on the dual
mating strategy side, they're not discussing the advances and
the subtleties that that like that side is offered,
they're just like frozen in this like, you know,
superficial interpretation of this like 2010 version of this
hypothesis because, you know, that's what sports are willing
to do, that's all they need.
So, you've already given us a specific example there,
but are there other examples among the claims you
came across over time that you think are, uh,
I, I mean, that you would think are the
most worrying coming from the madnessere that would, that
link at least with some evolutionary psychology research. I
mean, claims that maybe Are the most harmful, like,
for example, misogynistic claims or claims that inspire hate
toward women, for example, which are very common. I
mean, do you have any other examples like that?
I mean, yeah, that's a pretty bad one. I
think, I think this interpretation of this dual mating
strategy hypothesis is pretty popular, and I think it
does ground, uh, you know, I said there's not
a lot of things that unite the manosphere, but
I do think. Uh, ANTI-FEMINIST attitudes, you know, if
we wanna say misogynist attitudes, I, I think that's
like another uniting feature, uh, in a lot of
Manosphere claims, uh, and I do think this interpretation
of the dual mating strategy hypothesis does in particular
like lend itself a lot to these sorts of
misogynistic attitudes, right? Um, AND there's also, there's this
like Odd tendency, you know, again, I would also
recommend to all my colleagues, you know, go read
the red pill subreddit, just like just check in
periodically, again, it's not gonna feel good, uh, but
it's gonna be eye opening in terms of, you
know, how, how our ideas and our ways of
thinking get appropriated in these fears. Uh, AND there's
just like there's this weird tendency where Like when
it comes to thinking about women's mating psychology, these
people are, you know, really dedicated amateur scientists, right?
Like they're really willing to put women's mating psychology
under a microscope and, you know, analyze it in
these like pseudo evolutionary terms, and that's where like,
you know, the dual mating strategy hypothesis is useful,
right? You can characterize women as being just sort
of like Yeah, like Darwinian automatons who are just,
you know, Controlled like puppets by their genes towards
like dating, having sex with these alpha male chads
and, you know, duping these like, you know, poor
betas and supporting uh supporting their lifestyles, right? It's,
it's a very anti-woman, uh, uh, and it, you
know, very much deprives uh. How do I say
this? You, you could get the impression, you know,
they did, they are interested in the evolutionary psychology
of men's mating psychology as well. Uh, THEY do
acknowledge that, you know, men's mating psychology is evolved
too, but if you read these, it would be
very easy to come away. If you read the
way they actually talk about these things, it's very
easy to come. WITH the belief that like, only
men have free will, uh, like men are out
here just trying to do the right thing, just
trying to live a good life, uh, but they
are sort of victims to women's mating psychology in
large part because of this dual mating strategy logic,
right? Um, SO I think that does support, I
don't know if it creates, but it does support
this particularly misogynistic, I think anti-feminist worldview. Uh, I
think there are other things. You know, like I
said, my specialties and preferences, um, and when you
read, you know, another major part of especially like
Incel worldviews, as I understand it, um, is this
like obsession, there's a belief that women Really value
physical attractiveness, uh, again, stemming from this dual mating
strategy hypothesis, like the idea that what women are
looking for are these like good genes indicators, this
like masculinity, dominance, height, uh, muscularity, etc. ETC. That's
like what women really care about, um, and they
don't care about, you know, people who are kind
and good-hearted and, you know, uh, uh, you know,
nice guys finish last sort of woe is me
kind of attitude. Uh, SO they have this belief
that like physical attractiveness really is what matters in
uh human relationships, and they really ignore all of
the substantial evidence that like physical attractiveness is not
the most important thing to most people, uh, which
is one of the most robust findings from preference
research, you know, this is where evolutionary psychologists can
catch some flack, right? Uh, I think a lot
of the evolutionary psychology of, of mate preferences for
reasons, but nonetheless has really heavily emphasized sex differences
and mate preferences. And when you look at, you
know, If you order mate preferences in terms of
like how sex differentiated they are, yeah, things like
age, physical attractiveness, resources, those are some of the
larger sex differences in mate preferences. So those are
the things that men and women disagree on the
most in terms of what they're looking for in
a partner. But if you order preferences in terms
of what do people actually find important, what do
people actually find value in a partner, like physical
attractiveness is pretty. Middling for most people around the
world, and it has been for as long as
people have been doing this research, right? Physical attractiveness
is not the most important thing to men or
women, to most men or women. The things that
are most important to people are things like kindness,
right? That is generally the thing that appears towards
the top of most people's lists. Uh, AND that
I think gets zero play in these circles, or,
you know, they sort of. Accuse women uh of
being deceitful about how much they value kindness, but
of course men are not being deceitful, that couldn't
be, uh, so yeah, I think that's another way
where the literature gets distorted, um, uh, in ways
that that support these, I think. Yeah, I think
misogynistic, uh, anti-feminist worldviews. Um, THERE'S other things, uh,
there's one idea, I think maybe Louie introduced this
to me. I don't remember where I learned about
this, but there's something that like a reasonably popular
idea among uh in cells called uh Breau's law
or something like that, um, which is like, it's
supposed to be an idea from evolutionary biology that
like, Basically like the female of the species like
dictates all like patterns of interactions, uh, it's like,
you know, if there's no benefit to an interaction
from females, then like females have power to like
uh end that interaction, and this is supposed to
be, again, this contributes to this sort of like
anti-feminist worldview that like, you know, women secretly control
society and that like feminism is a like a
covert agenda to advance women's interests in society over
men. And you know, they cite this Briau's law
as like, you know, evidence that this is grounded
in like evolutionary biological principles. Like I had never
heard of Briau's law before I started reading this
man stuff. Uh, IT turns out like. I tried
to include this like in an early draft of
my my Boston Globe thing, but it got cut.
But like it turns out like Brio was like
a surgeon, like he wasn't even a scientist, he
was just like a French surgeon who just said
this. Uh, I don't think it was based on
any evidence really, it was just this guy's opinion.
Um, AND I don't think it really caught on
at the time. Somehow it got rediscovered and, you
know, the manosphere has decided that this is like
a scientifically supported law, but like, no scientist I've
ever heard of. I've never heard a scientists talk
about this. I've never heard a science reference this
scientist referenced this, um. You know, psychology is not
generally the kind of science that issues laws. Like
we don't, we don't understand the mind enough to
be making laws. Uh, MAYBE if you're like a
psychophysicist, maybe if you're talking about like how bright
a point of light is on a wall, like
maybe you can start dictating, you can, you can
start expressing some laws, but like, Uh, it's very
unusual to hear like a psychological scientist or an
anthropologist talk about laws other than maybe like scaling
laws and like how big an organism's arm is
relative to its body or something like that. Uh,
SO it's again, it's just like a complete fabrication
that has like the veneer of science on it,
but like, again, you scratch the surface a little
bit and you see like there's no actual scientific
basis for this for this idea.
Yeah, but I mean, from your own perspective as
an evolutionary psychologist, why do you think that evolutionary
psychology became so popular among people from the menosphere?
What makes it so appealing to them?
It's a good question. And it's something I've been
asking myself for two years now. Uh, AND I,
I, I'm afraid I don't have a great answer.
Um. I think there's there's multiple things that that
could be contributing here. It's probably not just one
thing. Um, I mean, for one, you know, to
our credit, I guess, uh, we as evolutionary psychologists,
we have a lot to say about human mating
and human relationships, and that is a big part
of what the manosphere cares about, right? These are
people who are frustrated with their experiences in love.
They're turning to the the modern science of dating
and relationships and love, and, you know, evolutionary psychologists
have done a good job mapping human mating psychology
and and providing insights into human relationships. And so
I, I think it's pretty natural you would come
across evolutionary psychology if you're looking for, you know,
a greater understanding of, of, you know, why things
aren't going the way you want them in your
personal life. That's like we're not the only game
in town, right? Social psychologists have also made a
lot of really valuable contributions. So sociologists, so anthropologists,
uh, so there is something out of all of
the people who have something to say, they are
picking out us in particular, um, and so I
think we as evolutionary psychologists, I think we do
have to think hard about, you know, what are
we doing that's making our science stand out as
interesting to these people with these particularly hateful uh
worldviews. I think there is a long history of,
you know, right wing movements appropriating evolutionary theory. Um,
I think it's, it's not hard. THERE'S a a
dim read of like selfish gene, you know, geneic
level selection that I think, um, you know, caters
to particular sort of like right wing authoritarian worldviews,
right? Like survival of the fittest kind of, especially
if you're prone to committing the naturalistic fallacy and,
and, you know, believing that, you know, what is
natural is good or should be. You know, I
think the idea that like selection works by, you
know, sort of cut out the weak and leaving
only the strong for the survival of the species
or whatever, I think can be appealing to people
who have um certain certain kind of right wing
ideologies, which I think does tie into sort of
anti-feminist ideologies and misogynistic ideologies. Um, YOU know, there's
also, of course, a long history of association between,
uh, you know, evolutionary thinking and eugenics, of course,
um, and I think a lot of these, I
don't think eugenics per se is a part of
the manosphere ideology, but I would not, uh, I
think there is a general, uh, these days, a
trend in especially a lot of online communities, a
lot of online right wing communities. Uh, YOU know,
eugenics is having a resurgence, and I would not
be surprised if there's some overlap between, you know,
the kinds of people who, uh, these manosphere ideologies
appe appeal to you as well as the kinds
of people, um, who, you know, these. Uh, NEO
eugenics ideas appeal to you. So I, I think
it's not hard. Uh, IT'S unfortunately not hard to
kind of fall into these right wing ideologies from
evolutionary thinking, uh, especially if you have a kind
of superficial read of what evolutionary theory is or
says. Um, SO I think that's just like a
constant struggle that you have to fight with when
you are a scientist in these evolutionary spaces, right?
Like, not, uh, not catering to these like. Uh,
AGAIN, superficial reads of what evolutionary theory is that
that promotes these right wing ideologies, um. And then
I also think Partly because of this, um, there's
a long history of evolutionary approaches to behavior, especially
human behavior, being controversial, right? Um, I think because
of these, you know, long standing right wing associations,
there is an understandable from people with especially left
wing ideologies, there's an understandable hesitance around evolutionary approaches,
behaviors that can be a sort of knee jerk,
uh, rejection of these kinds of approaches, knee jerk
criticism of these approaches. Um, SO it gets automatically,
no matter what you're doing or saying, I think
taking an evolutionary approach to human behavior automatically is
controversial, um, and it automatically controversial to people with
more, you know, left leaning ideologies, and so I
think for that reason the field can take on.
It takes on a reputation as being like kind
of a safe space for provocateurs, right? Uh, THIS
is the place where you go if you want
to say controversial things, especially if you want to
say things that run contrary to left wing ideologies,
right? Um, SO I think there are a lot
of people. Who come to the field, not because
they have a deep interest in, like, you know,
Santa Barbara style adaptation, uh, but just cause like
they enjoy making people mad and they just especially
enjoy making, you know, left leaning people mad, um,
and I think there are some scientists who have
that kind of motivation, right? I think they come
to the field just because they want to say
controversial things, and I think there are a lot
of lay people who, you know, the field has
gained that reputation. Um, AND so they come to
the field, like, if I know I'm, you know,
I don't like feminism, if I know I've got
these misogynistic ideas, I know I want some scientific
backing for these kind of anti-left wing ideas, then,
you know, hey, there's this evolutionary psychology thing that
people on the left seem to hate, uh, and,
you know, has these like provocative people who are
running their mouths, right? Like this seems like maybe
a good place to find the kind of scientific
support that I'm looking for, uh, and I, I
really worry that The field uh is maybe kind
of trapped in this sort of positive feedback loop
where I, I think by virtue of having this
reputation as being uh a safe place to stir
a controversy, right, it attracts people who are more
interested in controversy than science. Uh, THOSE people do
and say controversial things, which earns the field that
more of that reputation, which attracts more of these
people. Uh, AND I think makes it more and
more an appealing place to these, these manosphere communities.
So even though I don't think these things have
a deep connection to the like the theoretical logic
of the field, it's like sort of hard to
shake out of this reputation and and hard to
to get away from these, these, you know, Cycles
of controversy.
And what do you make of evolutionary psychologists who
are public intellectuals and align themselves with the manosphere
or at the very least sympathize with the manosphere?
Uh, uh, WE'RE being recorded, right? Um, YOU know.
I think there are lots of people out there
with lots of different motivations, some of which I
think are purer than others. Um, uh, I, it's
a really, it's not an easy thing to know
what to do about, right? Um. You know, I,
I think there's certainly a part of me, uh,
especially there was once a part of me that
was like, Yeah, I just wanna close my eyes
to all of this stuff and just do my
science, right? The best thing we can do is
just put as much truth out there into the
world, and eventually that truth will filter out. Like,
someone else will, you know, I'm a scientist, I'm
not a public intellectual, I'm not a good popularizer.
Like, it, it's not my job, and it can't
be my job to like communicate what I do
to the masses. I'm just gonna do my science
and like somebody else. I'll trust that somebody else
will communicate this accurately to the masses. Um, THAT'S,
that's a comforting idea. Uh, BUT like that's Clearly
doesn't work, right? Um, I, I think we as
scientists do have an obligation to, you know, communicate.
Our findings to the public, right? The public is
bankrolling this work, we're doing it ostensibly for the
public good. We have an obligation, I think, to
make sure that our work is actually promoting the
public good and it's, you know, the the the
public is actually educated on on on what science
is finding, um, so I think there are people
out there who are doing a noble job trying
to accurately communicate. You know, modern understanding of society
and dating from science, you know, I, I would
count you among them, uh, um, and I think
that's something that like we as scientists need to
do more and need to do better. I do
think there are. Uh, SO those public intellectuals I
admire, and you know, incels like. I, I don't
want to say like incels are necessarily bad people,
right? Um, I think incel ideologies are bad. I
think they're despicable. Um, I think they have led
to tangible harm. I think both to women and
to men, like, I think the men who fall
into this are being harmed by these, these like
uh fatalistic false ideologies, um. But I don't think
like the men who fall into this are necessarily
bad people, right? I can understand, you know, I've
I've like had friends who have fallen into these
circles, right? Like I think there's a, a not
terribly distant universe where I could have fallen into
these sorts of these sorts of ideologies, right? Like,
I get it, um, and so I think, you
know, it is good to Um, try to engage
with these men, right? I, I think, like, I
think it's a noble effort, uh, to try to
show these people that you don't have to believe
these things. I think there is a read of
the science that is more hopeful, is not anti-feminist,
and I think there are people out there trying
to do that, and I think that's a good
thing, uh, and I admire those public intellectuals, uh,
but it's also engaging with these kinds of communities,
it can be difficult. Because, you know, by engaging,
you know, the academic freedom types will say, you
know, everything should kind of live or die in
the marketplace of ideas, right? Like you should not
be afraid to debate anything and, you know, if
your idea is really good, it will survive. And
there's some truth in that, but at the same
time, like, engaging some of these ideologies can run
the risk of legitimizing them in ways that really
backfire, right? Some of these ideas are just bad,
they're just stupid, and they should just be ignored.
And, you know, if you try to debate these
people, you know, there are people out there who
are not earnestly interested in debate, right? They are
ideologues, you're not gonna change their mind, you're not
gonna change their communities' minds, and by debating them,
you're just making them, especially if you're coming with
like, you know, university credentials, and if you're, you
know, using your valuable time as a scientist to
debate with these people, you're sending a signal to
the world that like, this is an ideology that's
worth paying attention to. So even if you feel
as though you've like definitively uh uh bested them
in the marketplace of ideas, like, there's a lot
of ideologues out there who are not gonna care
what you have to say, and they're just gonna
say like, look, we got the scientists to pay
attention to us, that means we've got something worth
saying. Uh, SO I think you need to I
think engaging with these communities can be good, but
you need to do it really carefully in a
way that's not legitimizing them, uh, in a way
that's not, uh, giving them clout that they don't
deserve. Uh, I think there are some people who
even sort of flirt with, um, You know, I
think in an effort to maybe ingratiate themselves a
little bit with these communities to get better access,
I think there's way people who maybe inadvertently end
up sort of promoting some of these ideologies, and
then I think there are people, I think there
are people who are just cynical, uh, and, um,
you know, they're public intellectuals just because they want
to be famous and this just happened to be
their best way to do that. Uh, I think
they don't have, you know, the public's interest in
mind. Uh, I think this is just a good
way to get a paycheck for them, um, and
so they are, you know, gleefully, I don't think
they care about these issues. I don't think they
care whether Manosphere ideologies are right or not. I,
I think they're bullshitters. I think they don't care
what the truth is, they just care what butters
they're bread, um, and those people I think are
despicable. Uh, I won't name names, but, you know,
you can probably guess who I think they are
from, you know, uh. Just their attitudes and, you
know, my social media, um, but, uh, yeah, those
people I think are, I think they're willing to
sell out the field. I think they're willing to
sell out the science, uh, to make a quick
buck for themselves, uh, and I think that's what's
sort of perpetuating this, this positive feedback cycle that
is really damaging, you know, I think evolutionary psychology
is like one of the best. Scientific enterprises in
the history of psychology. I think this is the
best way to do psychology. I think this is
our best hope to understand the human mind and
like harness this to improve society, um, but I
think I, I worry about our ability to achieve
that because there are these, I, I think bad
actors who um are willing to cash in on
whatever scientific credibility the rest of us are working
hard to build, uh, in order to get, you
know, An extra high paying speaking gig or, you
know, a nice, you know, editorial position on some
white supremacist magazine or something like that. Um, uh,
SO yeah, those people I think are are bad.
Did I answer your question? Uh,
YEAH, yes, I, I think so. So, uh, uh,
let me ask you now, I, I, I mean,
I, I'm not sure to what extent this will
be a little bit speculative, but, uh, from what
you understand, what do you think are the motivations
of people who made a name for themselves in
the menosphere. I mean, is it, is it, what
is it? Money, social status? I mean, maybe I,
I'm, I'm not sure. I don't know their own
personal stories, but, uh, I would imagine that perhaps
at least one or two of them would have,
uh, a history of, uh, bad past relationships or
something like that. So, I, I mean, but what
do, what do you think about it?
Yeah, yeah, I, I don't think there's like 11
easy answer, and I think I, I, you know,
I kind of said part of what I think
about this, right? It, you know, I think the
manosphere itself is, is nebulous. It, it's a loose
collection of a lot of different people and communities.
Um, SO I don't think there's like one motivation
you can ascribe to all people who are in
these circles. Um, LOOK, I, it's easy and fun.
To be cynical, uh, and just say all of
these people are grifters, they're just in it to
get a paycheck for themselves, you know, they don't,
they don't care about. You know, they don't care
about these people, they don't care about the ground
truth of these ideologies, they're just, yeah, they're just
after money and status for themselves, and that's actually,
I think like a good heuristic when it comes
to uh influencers of all stripes, right? Like that's
probably gonna lead you right more often it leads
you wrong. So if you want a pat answer,
yeah, like it just you can trust that most
people are doing the things that they're doing, uh,
just cause, you know, it gives them money and
status, um. But I, I, I don't think that's
true of everybody. Uh, YEAH, I think there's probably
a spectrum here. I think there are people who
do have some more. Misguided as they may be,
have some more genuine motivations, and then I think
there are people who are just like cynical cash
grab people. So, you know, I think like, like
Andrew Tate. Uh, FRESH and fit, like, I don't
think they care about their audiences, right? I don't
think they want to help anybody, right? They're con
artists, right? You know, if you're watching this, you
know, you're somebody who's like, you know, maybe adjacent
to the Intel circle, maybe you're curious about these
things, like, I promise you, Andrew Tate doesn't give
a shit about you. Like he's a con artist.
He's in it to make as much money for
himself. He's like no. A convicted criminal, um, like,
yeah, I don't think he has a deep commitment
to any particular worldview. Uh, I don't think he
has a deep interest to like helping men live
better lives or whatever. Uh, I think he just
wants to make as much money, um, and have
as much status as he can get, um. You
know, other people like, you know, I don't know
your Jordan Petersons, Jordan Peterson think he's helping people?
Uh, I think he's wrong. I think he's misguided.
I think he is doing a lot of harm,
uh, but like, is he, I, I could believe
that he is so deluded that he doesn't think
he's doing that. Like, I could believe that he
thinks he's doing the right thing and he's just
wrong about what the right thing is. Um, uh,
BUT I I don't think he likes money and
status too, right? Uh, I think he's, you know,
he could have stayed in his university position and
he could have done these things, you know, by,
by doing the science, but he chose to become
this, you know, Uh, firebrand, uh, you know, controversial
public intellectual influencer type, so I, I, you know,
I think, I think that he does have some
self-interest as well, um. You know, I, I think,
you know, these like dating coach pickup artists, kind
of YouTubers and TikTok guys and book writers, you
know. I think those guys maybe have the most.
Pure intentions again, I think their ideas are misogynistic
and wrong, uh, but I think, you know, for
the most part, I think they do think that
they're like helping men with their dating problems, right?
Um, AND, you know, making some money, but we
all got to make money. Uh, SO I think
there's a diversity of motivations out there, um, some
of which are pure and some which are not,
um, and it can be hard to tell, uh,
in some cases exactly how pure there are, uh,
but in some cases, you know, again, you're, you're
amputates at all. Uh, IT'S pretty clear that they,
they have no intentions of helping anyone in their
lives.
Right. I, I mean, it seems to me, I
don't know if you will agree with this or
not, but it seems to me at the end
of the day that what the menosphere mostly offers
men are rationalizations for their failures. Do you agree
with that or at least to some extent?
It's, it's, it's tough. I I don't know that
I want to say like. I guess it depends
on what you mean by rationalizations, you know, again,
it's so easy and so tempting to be cynical,
um, you know, it's so easy to just say
like, these people are losers and they're just looking
for excuses for why they're losers. Uh, BUT I,
I don't think that's what we should say, and
I don't think that's quite right. Um, I, I
think there are people out there, yeah, who are
like that, but I, I think, you know, I,
again, not being a sociologist, not being like an
expert in manosphere or like intel psychology, in my,
my opinion as like a mating psychology person who's
just been sort of exposed to these things, my
impression is like, these are men who have some
genuine frustrations, right? Uh SOME understandable frustrations, right? Like,
you know, dating, mating mating is a big part
of life, right? Uh, IT'S a thing that it
makes sense to have lots of strong feelings about.
Um, AND if it's not going the way that
you want it to go, like that does feel
terrible, right? Uh, IT feels terrible for good reasons.
Um, AND so I think if you're the kind
of guy who just for whatever reason, you're not
having the success you want in relationships, I think
it's reasonable to turn to Google and say like,
you know, what's going on, right? Why am I
not having the life I want to have, you
know, how do I explain the situation that I'm
in, and, you know, what can I do to
try to get out of it? And I think
a lot of manosphere communities sort of emerged originally
as like attempts to offer those kinds of answers,
uh, and they sort of fell into this kind
of misogynistic anti-feminist, uh hateful at times violent track,
uh, at some point, um, but, you know, in
principle, I think like, Uh, these, the, the kinds,
especially, you know, if you're not talking about these
like grifter influencers who I think are, you know,
appropriating these communities to their own interests. We're just
talking about like the men who are reading these
things, uh, who are posting these things, who are
just trying to like Get some advice. Like I,
I think they are just like, yeah, they're just
like any person who's like, why is my, you
know, sourdough not turning out the way I want
it to, right? Like they're just going to internet
communities, they're going to communities of of people like
them and trying to get advice and it's just
like has fallen into this, this strange um uh
strange misogynistic uh tone. Uh, SO I don't know
if it's like, I don't wanna say it's rationalizations
for their failures. I think it's just like, it's
just people trying to understand how to live a
better life, um, and I'm, you know, sympathetic to
them for that reason, um, but I do think
it gets, it gets co-opted by people who don't
necessarily have these people's best interests in mind.
OK, so when it comes to those people who
do not have these other people's best interests in
mind and the kinds of uh erroneous and very
negative claims that they make about women and other
and other kinds of things, um, do you think,
uh, in what ways do you think that those
claims might also hurt the men who are attracted
to the men's?
I, I, I, yeah, I think it's bad for
these men, right? Um, uh, I think, you know,
and there's research out there, right, like on, especially
in cells, right? I, I think are very hopeless,
fatalistic people. I think by virtue of being convinced
of this worldview that basically like if you are
physically unattractive, you are sort of like doomed by
Darwin. To live this unhappy life, where like, I
mean, you know, I think the intel worldview is
basically either like you're a chad and you're doomed
to live this like playboy lifestyle where sure you'll
get lots of sex, but you'll never experience true
love, or you're like a beta. And like your,
your fate is to be like duped by women
forever, like, maybe you'll get like brief glimpses of
what feels like love, but you'll ultimately be, you'll
ultimately be betrayed by like feminism and women's mating
psychology. It's a really grim outlook. Um, AND I
think it does contribute to a lot of depression
and anxiety. Maybe, I don't know if it contributes,
maybe it caters to the depression anxiety that was
already there, but like, it's certainly not helping these
men, you know, feel good about their lives, right?
I think it is providing, um. It it's providing
a worldview that just sort of keeps them stably
hopeless, um, and I, you know, I think that's
why this does, uh, as we see, like, often
result in self-harm or violence towards others, right? I
think, uh, so it is a very negative. Um,
NEGATIVE, I think these are very negative communities for
the men in them. Uh, AND again, I think
these worldviews are false, right? I think these are
based on misinterpretations of, of, uh, the science. I
think they're based on misinterpretations of society, and so
if we could debate to them what the science
actually says and show them the world is not
as hopeless as these, you know, like manosphere communities
are persuading them that it is, yeah, I do
think they would be better off.
Mhm. And I also think, I mean, just to
talk about a specific example, I think that sometimes
they might even hurt the chances of some of
these men who are attracted to the menosphere because
if you go on, I don't know, uh, or
if you listen to the Fresh and Fit podcast
or something along those lines and you hear, and
you constantly hear from them things like you have
to be, you have to go to the gym,
you have to have this chiseled body and face.
You have to wear expensive clothes, you have to
have an expensive car, you have to have a
six-figure salary, a good house, uh, and all of
those kinds of things. I mean, that, that, that's
not really true that you have to have all
of those things to be successful in the mating
market. And perhaps some of the men who listen
to this just Uh, just quit because they can't
have access to all of those things, I guess,
yeah, yeah, uh, it's true, it's true, um, yeah,
uh, and I, I don't, I don't. I don't
get it. I don't get. This is maybe my
failure. Maybe this is why, like, I didn't become
an incel or something, but like I, I just
Like, you look at these guys who are telling
you like this is the like secret to like
happiness and relationship success like these people aren't happy,
they're not having relationship success and like look like
again it's like you're like a, you know, incel
curious person watching this, like, I like not to
do my own horn, but like I'm an expert
in human mating psychology. uh I do good work,
I think, in these areas. I have like, you
know, I have some ideas about how human mating
relationships work that other people, you know, seem to
think. Uh, ARE onto something, and also like, I'm,
I'm like a ugly chubby dork, uh, who like
does not make a ton of money. I'm an
academic, like, and I, you know, I'm happily married.
I'm, I'm, I'm happy, right? My wife and I
had been together for 14 years or something like
that, right, like. Like these people who are selling
you this worldview, like, they don't have what they're
selling you, right? I do, right? I'm, I'm the
established expert on human mating psychology, and I, you
know, I've been living a good life. I have
a good, I have a relationship, like you don't,
yeah, you don't need to like go to the
gym if you want to go to the gym,
like, you know, work out if that makes you
happy, it's good to be healthy, you should take
care of your body, but like, you don't need
to be this like weird vision of this alpha
male chad, that's not even what women are actually
looking for. Uh, AND the data supports that, right,
like these people, these people are lying to you,
like you, you don't need to believe these things.
Right. So what do you think should be done
by evolutionary psychologists themselves to fight back against the
misuse of their own research?
I don't know. Um, uh, I don't know. Um.
You know, I, I think step one is at
least acknowledging it, right? Uh, I think, you know,
like I said, for a long time, I was
sort of vaguely aware the stuff was out there,
but I was, I was very happy to keep
it at arm's length, um, and I think that
was the wrong idea, right? Um, CAUSE I think
if we, as long as we ignore it, it
just kind of, it festers on its own, right?
Like these communities are gonna keep taking our science,
they're gonna keep cherry picking and misquoting and misinterpreting
it. Uh, AND it's just gonna, it's gonna take
on a weird life of its own, um, which
is gonna, you know, contribute to this harm, and
I think it's also gonna reflect back on the,
the reputation of the field. So I, I don't
think we can ignore it, um. You know, I,
I don't think, um, Again, I think we have
to be careful though with how we engage these
communities. I think there are people out there who,
with uh sometimes good intentions, uh, but I think
have tried to like approach these communities from a
scientific background, um, but do it in a way
that I think ends up legitimizing these ideologies or
legitimizing these worldviews. Uh, AGAIN, I, I, I, you
have to be careful with how you Broach those
conversations and broach those debates. So I don't think
like evolutionary psychologists should be going out there and
like having debates with like manosphere influencers or going
on manosphere podcasts and like trying to show them
the way cause I, I think that that gives
these people clout that they don't deserve, um. So
I, I don't have the right answer here. I'm
not confident that I've done the right thing, you
know, my, my gut reaction was, you know, I,
I do think Uh, one good thing we can
do is just be vocal that like we do
not agree with these ideologies, right? Like, despite what
you might read on, you know, the red pill
subreddit or what you might read in the scientific
black pill community like we as a scientists, as
scientists I think have a minimum obligation. Of just,
you know, publicly and loudly saying, right, like, we
are the ones doing the science and we do
not think the science necessarily leads to these ideologies.
Some scientists may disagree. They're wrong, but that's fine.
People are allowed to be wrong, but like I,
I think it's important for those of us who
are level headed and reasonable and right about these
things, to at least like publicly say it, like,
come out and say like, I don't think that
these scientific findings necessarily lead to this worldview, because
that at least makes it that much a little
bit harder uh for these mantisphere communities to appropriate
uh these ideologies, right? If we scientists aren't at
least showing that there's disagreement among the scientists, uh,
if we aren't showing that like you can be
an evolutionary psychologist and not be anti anti-feminist and
not be a misogynist, then I think that silence,
you know, speaks volumes to. You know, I'm thinking
about like, you know, a 15 year old kid
who's like, you know, just starting out his like
dating career, and it's not going the way that
he wants it to, and he's frustrated and he's
depressed, and he's looking for an explanation for what's
happening to him and how to do better, and,
you know, if you go into these incel communities
and you see these like pseudo scientific You know,
justifications for this worldview, and then you go to
the scientists and the scientists are saying nothing. The
scientists, you know, aren't at least disagreeing with these
things. They aren't at a minimum saying, uh, I
don't think that's how you interpret these things, but
then they, you know, that is sort of like
tacit approval of these these ideologies, right? So I
think we as scientists at a minimum have an
obligation to come out and say clearly in public,
which I tried to do, um. That like you
don't have to draw these interpretations out of this
worldview. Um, YOU know, I, I think I've been
accused of saying that like, Uh, I, I don't
know that like scientists should like self-censor for this
reason or something like that, like, you know, that
I think we should like not study certain topics
or something like that. I think that's stupid. Like,
look at my CV like uh I certainly don't
think we should avoid studying these topics. I think
these topics are really important, but I think we
just need to be clear as we're studying these
things, um. And again, like I don't think, I
don't think we should necessarily be making policy recommendations
either. I'm not qualified to dictate public policy. I'm
not qualified, uh, you know, to write like divorce
laws or I'm not qualified to give dating advice
even, like I am not, I'm not that kind
of person. Uh, SO I don't think evolutionary psychologists
need to be going out there and saying this
is the ideology that I think my work supports,
uh, but I do think, you know, especially when
people are perverting our work to support harmful ideologies,
I think we do have an obligation to come
out, come out publicly and say no, that is
not, you know, at least a necessary interpretation of
what my science says.
Mhm. So as a last question, let me just
put this through you to see what you, what
are your ideas about it. So, in the psychology
today post titled Combating the Misuse of Evolutionary Psychology
Research, Andrew Thomas, who I've already had on the
show, is, is also an evolutionary psycho. He suggests
three ways by which researchers can address misinterpretations. And
the first one is avoid absolutes. The second one
is emphasize similarities, not just differences. And the last
one is highlight agencies. So what do you think
of that?
I think I think, uh, Those are good first
steps, um, you know, I think those are just,
that's just good science, right? Um, I think, uh,
as scientists. We shouldn't be issuing absolutes anyway, right?
Uh, SCIENCE doesn't, you know, it isn't math, right?
We can't prove things, um, you know, we work
in trends and expectations and generalities, um, and so
avoiding absolutes is, is just, you know, how you
should do your science to begin with, regardless of,
you know, manosphere communities or whatever, um, and I
do think, uh, again, this is, uh, A common
place where you see the research getting lost in
translation as it makes it out to these manosphere
communities. Like I do think Especially if you're not
especially statistically savvy, especially if you're not like immersed
in this kind of data, you know, day in,
day out, and have a good intuition for what
these data mean, uh. A lot of the effect
sizes in like the statistical effect sizes in human
mating literature are really small, uh, like, and that
gets lost in translation as it makes it out
onto like the scientific black pill wiki, right? Like
you would think by reading these sort of like
narrative description of what evolution. PSYCHOLOGISTS are finding, yeah,
you would think that these are like large absolute
differences. But then when you actually look at the
data, like a lot of the differences we're talking
about are pretty small because human behavior is complicated.
It's always caused by multiple factors when multiple factors
cause something, each one necessarily has a smaller impact.
Uh, AND so I think being clear, it's hard
to make this clear. It's hard to like grok
intuitively what like a coins D of point to
means, but like I promise you it's pretty small.
Like that's the kind of difference that you can
notice, uh, you know, in a carefully controlled scientific.
But you're probably not going to notice very much
as you're walking down the street, right, with your
human eye. So I think, you know, psychologists in
general could do a better job of being clear
about what, how big are the effects we're actually
studying, what do these actually mean for people's day
to day lives? Um, SO I think that's, that's
a good thing to be mindful of. Um. And
I do think evolutionary psychologists. Again, for good reasons,
sex differences are important and, you know, they do
provide like good theoretical leverage in terms of like
testing ideas about uh the nature of the mind,
but evolutionary psychologists, I do think have way overemphasized
sex differences. I say this as a person who's
done a lot of sex differences research, who has
some sex difference research ongoing. Like, I think these
things matter, but I, I do think we've like,
um. We studied sex differences to the exclusion of
actually studying psychology, uh, to some degree, and I
do think the field could use a bit of
a course correction on that. Again, I think that's
true independent of the manosphere, right? I, I think
there's just a lot of things, um. There's a
lot of things where, yeah, I think we've studied
differences in the psychology, but we forgot to study
how the psychology actually works in the first place,
and so I, I do think that's a good
idea. Agency. Um, I think it's a weird one,
that's like that's maybe a more philosophical thing, uh,
you know, uh, you know, I, I, I don't
understand how one can be a professional psychologist and
believe in free will, uh, but you know, I
think where agency comes in, where agency gets lost
in translation again is I think the sort of
manosphere. Uh, TAKE on things is generally like men
have agency and women do not, right? And so
I think like if you're gonna focus on agency,
you either need to, uh, yeah, be clear on
everybody's agency, or you need to be clear on,
you know, no one's agency, right? Um, YOU know,
at the end of the day, like, yeah, I'm
a psychologist. I think behavior is caused, and I
think we can scientifically understand those causes. Um, I
don't think that provides, you know, excuse from moral
culpability for your behavior. Um, BUT I think, you
know, you certainly don't want to be, uh, projecting
an image that like women are sort of like
slaves to their genetic interests, but men are sort
of endowed with mystical free will that allows them
to to to make good decisions or something like
that. Um, YOU know, I, I, so I think
those are all good scientific recommendations. I don't think
that goes far enough though, right? I, I think.
Uh, WE as evolutionary psychologists do need to look
inward, um, and we do need to be, we
do need to be more careful with our language.
Uh, WE do need to be more careful, I
think, with the kinds of, uh, you know, topics
that we pursue that like like we are actually
pursuing things that are in the public interest and
that we're talking about them in ways that, um,
cannot be easily appropriated uh in these harmful ways,
um, but I think There's only so much we
can do like within ourselves. Like you can write
your paper as carefully as you want. If someone
wants to appropriate it, they're going to, right? There's
no magic set of words that you can say
that is gonna prevent, you know, a grifter or
an ideologue from perverting it in some way that
suits their interests. So I think those are things
that are worth doing, but I think there is
something more we have to do. I don't know
what that is, right? I don't think those recommendations
are enough. Like I said, I think part of
it is we do have to stick our necks
out a little bit. We do have to, you
know, get in front of the public and, you
know, object to our research being used in ways
that we do not endorse, um. Cause, yeah, I,
I don't think there's any, any way of writing
your paper that's gonna prevent that from happening. At
some point you need to get up and say,
like, no, I think that's wrong, don't use my
research this way.
Great. So let's send on that note then. And
uh just before we go, would you like to
tell people where they can find your work on
the internet? And I don't know, would you have
any suggestions if people are interested in learning more
about the specific topic on the manere and the
misappropriation or the misuse of evolutionary psychology?
Yeah, I mean, you can find my work on
my website Dan Conroybeam.com. We have all of our
papers there if you're interested in reading the primary
literature, you can also follow me on Blue Sky
De Conroy Beam is my handle on all socials.
Um, YOU know, if you're interested in evolutionary psychology,
I'd go straight to the source, you know, read
up on the Center for Evolutionary Psychology website. There's
a premiere there that's like a great basic introduction
to like the core principles of the field. Um,
AND if you're interested in this sort of like
intersections between uh evolutionary psychology and the manosphere, honestly,
you know, I, I could not recommend the person
who got me into this, right? Louis Baho and
his work, I think has been really eye opening
for me, uh, I think it is a great
place to learn more, and, you know, I gave
a plug to. FD signifier before, uh, you know,
I've watched the rest of Ricardo's interviews as well,
but I'd also check out FD signifier. He's also
like interviewed evolutionary psychologist before. I think he's a
thoughtful guy who has really interesting perspectives on, on
science and society in the metasphere. So I've enjoyed
his content too.
Great. So I will be leaving links to all
of that in the description of the interview and
also to our first interview. So Doctor Konrahim, thank
you so much for taking the time to come
on the show again. It's always a pleasure to
talk with you.
Thanks so much for having me back. This is
a great conversation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelisky, Scott Zacharyishtim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diota Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.